By Megumu Honda (Yoshihama, Japan), Revised by Prof. Dr. Johannes Rahder, New Haven, Conn. (U.S.A.): ANNOTATED TRANSLATIO
N OF THE DAŚABHŪMIKA-SŪTRA1

INTRODUCTORY STANZAThose who aim at the enlightenment should listen to this declared Daśabhūmika Sūtra in which the ten b
est meritorious perfections are shown in several ways, the ten stages are proclaimed by the omniscient in order to benef
it the worldly people, and the pure middle way free from destruction and permanence announced:

INTRODUCTIONI have heard thus. Once upon a time the Blessed One dwelt in the divine world called Paranirmitavaśavartin,no
t long after his perfect enlightenment – in the second week – in the palace of divine king Vaśavartin which was full of 
maṇi-jewels and shining with a great multitude of Bodhisattvas,who were all not liable to turning back (from the road) a
nd limited to (only) one (more) birth, before reaching the supreme perfect enlightenment, and who had come together from
each world-region.All of them 1) dwelt in obtaining the range and scope of the varieties of knowledge of all Bodhisattv
as,2) had the scope of not abandoning the attainment of entering into the range of the varieties of knowledge of all Tat
hāgatas,3) were skillful in showing all the actions by sustaining power at the right time and moment when they mature an
d discipline all the worldly people,4) had the scope not abandoning the accomplishment of the vow of all the Bodhisattva
s and participating in the actions in [all] kalpas, times and realms,5) had practised the affording of inexhaustible liv
elihood to all worldly people by fulfilling the necessary preparation of merits, knowledge and supernatural faculties of
all the Bodhisattvas,6) attained the supreme perfections of wisdom and expedient (upaya) of all the Bodhisattvas, skilf
ul in showing the gate to metempsychosis and nirvāṇa, and (118) not giving up to devote themselves to the course of cond
uct of Bodhisattva,7) were skillful in showing all the actions by supernatural intuitions exhibiting the contemplations,
emancipations, meditations, concentrations, supernatural intuitions and knowledge of all the Bodhisattvas,8) attained t
he control of the supernatural powers of all the Bodhisattvas, approached the assembly of all the Tathāgatas in a moment
without effort, became the foremost preachers,holding the wheel of the doctrine of all the Tathāgatas, and rose up to r
evere and serve Buddhas widely,9) attained the appearance of (their own) bodies in all the world-regions by exerting the
mselves for the equality in obtaining the acts of all the Bodhisattvas,10) have resounded their unobstructed voices and 
sounds over all the realms of ideas, and have suffused all spheres of unobstructed mind and knowledge in the three (kind
s of) time (past, present, future),11) were praised for their inexhaustible merits, having fulfilled the merits and exer
cises of all the Bodhisattvas and manifesting the (Buddha's) sustaining power in innumerable world-ages,

such as (See the Sanskrit text)and, having them as their leaders, (other) immeasurable, unfathomable, countless, unthinka
ble, unequalled, immense, endless, limitless, unlimited, unobtainable, and inexpressible Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas have co
me together from different Buddha's realms, led by Vajragarbha Bodhisattva.

B Then indeed Bodhisattva Vajragarbha at that time has attained the Bodhisattva-meditation called ‘The Splendor of the Gr
eat Vehicle’ by Buddha’s might.As soon as Bodhisattva Vajragarbha attained this Bodhisattva-meditation called ‘The Splen
dor of The Great Vehicle’, Tathāgatas the number of which is comparable with the atom-dusts in hundred millions of Buddh
a's realms showed their faces beyond the world-regions (the number of which is) comparable with the atom-dusts in hundre
d millions of Buddha's realms in the ten directions. These Venerable Buddhas, having the same name Vajragarbha, spoke as
follows.

“Good! good! oh son of the Conqueror! that you attain this Bodhisattva-meditation called ‘The Splendor of The Great Vehic
le’,but indeed, o son of the noble family, these Tathāgatas having the same name Vajragarbha (the number of which is) co
mparable with the atom-dusts in hundred millions of Buddha's realms sustain you beyond the world-regions (the number of 
which is) comparable with the atom-dusts in hundred millions of Buddha's realms in ten directions by the sustaining powe
r of the former vow of this venerable Vairocana (or the Sun) and by your distinguished merit and knowledge. D “In order 
that all the Bodhisattvas 1) enter into the stage of knowledge disclosing unthinkable splendor of the Buddha's doctrine,
2) assemble all the basic merits,3) are skillful in investigating all the Buddha's doctrines,4) extend the knowledge abo
ut doctrines,5) elucidate the well settled doctrines,6) purify the unadulterated knowledge,7) do not defile all the worl
dly things8) purify the supermundane basic elements,9) realize the range of unthinkable knowledge,10) realize up to the 
range of knowledge of the omniscient, namely to attain the commencement of the ten stages of Bodhisattva,11) elucidate p
roperly the respective determination of the Bodhisattva-stages,12) acquire all the Buddha’s doctrines,13) contemplate th
e differentiation of the inclinations without evil influences,14) are skilled in the great splendor of wisdom with well-
chosen investigation,15) enter into the gate of well accomplished expert knowledge,16) show the inside-disclosing and sh
arp (fearless) eloquence in the appropriate place,17) accomplish the stage of great analytical knowledge,18) do not lose
the memory of the thought of enlightenment (bodhicitta),19) mature the regions of all the living beings,20) attain the 
skill in all-penetrating exegesis.

E “Again indeed, o son of noble family, this paragraph of the doctrine helpful in opening of the gate to the splendor of 
the doctrine should be preached to you 1) by Buddha's might and by the sustaining power of the splendor of Tathāgata's k
nowledge,2) in order to purify your own basic merits,3) in order to purify completely the realm of ideas,4) in order to 
favor the regions of living beings,5) in order to substantiate the knowledge of the body of the doctrine,6) in order to 
receive the coronation by all the Buddhas,7) in order to show the (great) body which excels all the worlds,8) in order t
o surpass the states of existence of all the worlds,9) in order to purify the states of existence of supermundane things
,10) in order to fulfill the knowledge of the omniscient.”

F Then indeed these venerable Buddhas provided for Bodhisattva Vajragarbha 1) the unsurpassed body,2) the elucidation by 
unobstructed eloquence,3) the entrance into the discrimination of well purified knowledge,4) the sustaining power not lo
sing the memory,5) the skill of well determined thought,6) the non-abandonment of intellect which goes everywhere,7) the
state of being uncrushed (even) by the power of a perfectly enlightened one,8) the state of not shrinking (even) before
the confidence of Tathāgata,9) the establishment of doctrinal principle distinguished by the knowledge of the omniscien
t and the analytical knowledge,10) the accomplishment of the ornament of well distinguished body, word and mind of all t
he Tathāgatas.

By what reason? Because he 1) attains the ultimate essence of meditation, 2) accomplishes former vow,3) well purified his
resolute intention,4) well cleansed the circle of knowledge,5) well collected the necessary preparation,6) well did the
purifying preparation,7) is the vessel of immense memory,8) purifies the clear confidence,9) well penetrated the non-br
eaking of the gate of magic formula,10) well sealed the position of the fingers by the knowledge of the realm of idea.

H Then indeed these venerable Buddhas, standing there, streched their right hands and stroked the head of Bodhisattva Vaj
ragarbha by their supernatural power.I As soon as being touched by these venerable Buddhas, then Bodhisattva Vajragarbha
stands up from this meditation. J And (he) addresses these Bodhisattvas

“This Bodhisattva's vow, o honorable sons of the Conqueror, is well determined, unadulterated, unseen, wide as the realm 
of ideas, terminated in the region of empty space, terminated the future extremity and rescued the regions of all the li
ving beings.Where, indeed, o honorable sons of the Conqueror, Bodhisattvas enter into the stage of knowledge of venerabl
e past Buddhas, enter into the stage of knowledge of venerable future Buddhasand enter into the stage of knowledge of ve
nerable present Buddhas, there, o honorable sons of the Conqueror, the ten stages of Bodhisattva enter into the stage of
knowledge of venerable Buddhas,and there, o honorable sons of the Conqueror, ten stages of Bodhisattva, with reference 
to which I am talking thus, have been announced, will be announced and are being announced by past, future and present v
enerable Buddhas.

What are the ten? Namely, the stage of Bodhisattva called 1) joy, 2) immaculate, 3) splendor, 4) brilliance, 5) difficult
to be overcome, 6) facing, 7) going far, 8) immovability, 9) good intelligence and 10) cloud of doctrine.Those, o honor
able sons of the Conqueror, are the ten stages of Bodhisattva which have been announced and are being announced by past,
future and present venerable Buddhas.I do not, o honorable sons of the Conqueror, see the extension of the Buddha's rea
lm where Tathāgatas do not bring to light these ten stages of Bodhisattva.By what reason? Excellent, o honorable sons of
the Conqueror, is this light of doctrinal gate which purify the Bodhisattva's path of Bodhisattvas the great Beings, th
at is the differentiation of the division of ten stages.Unthinkable, o honorable sons of the Conqueror, is this matter, 
that is the knowledge of stage.”

K Then indeed Bodhisattva Vajragarbha, having narrated only the names of these ten stages of Bodhisattva, was silent and 
did not elucidate the division anymore.

Then indeed the entire assembly of Bodhisattvas was eagerly desiring (an explanation). As only the names of these ten sta
ges of Bodhisattva are heard and the divisions of the stages of Bodhisattva are not uttered,

they think as follows, “By what reason and cause, indeed, Bodhisattva Vajragarbha, having narrated only the names of thes
e ten stages of Bodhisattva, spends his time in silence and does not elucidate the division any more?”

Again at that time indeed in this Bodhisattva’s assembly a Bodhisattva named Vimukticandra has come and sat together (wit
h the others). Then indeed Bodhisattva Vimukticandra, having known the deliberation of mental intention of the Bodhisatt
va's assembly, questioned Bodhisattva Vajragarbha by singing (the following) verses.

1) For what purpose, o mighty one endowed with pure thought, memory, knowledge and merit, is it that you, having proclaim
ed the excellent stages, do not bring to light (the division of these stages)?

2) All these Bodhisattvas are well determined and of great fame. Why, having proclaimed the stages, you do not speak of t
he division (of them)?

3) All these confident sons of the Conqueror want to hear. Divide properly and speak of the understanding of .the meaning
of the stages.

4) Indeed this assembly is calm, free from sloth, agreeable, pure, established in firmness and endowed with merit and kno
wledge.

5) Observing each other all of them stood with respect and long for the highest nectar as (bees long) for pure16 honey.

6) Having heard this Vajragarbha, son of the Conqueror, with great wisdom and confidence speaks out in order to satisfy t
he assembly.

7) Most difficult an I extraordinary is this manifestation of Bodhisattva's practices through which the highest division 
of the cause of the stages i.e. the attainment of the state of Buddha is (reached).

8) Subtle, difficult to see, free from constructive thoughtl?, devoid of the extent of mind (citta-bhumi-l)igata), hard t
o be met and without evil influence is the range of wise ones in which the worldly people (will) be bewildered if they h
ear it.

9) Having made up the heart (hard) like diamond, inclining towards the best knowledge of Buddha, having known the extent 
of mind without self, this subtle knowledge can be heard.

10) Like a color-painting in the atmosphere, like wind resorting to the path of birds, the knowledge of the venerable one
, difficult to be seen and without evil influence, is thus here classified and specified.

11) The following thought occurs to me “Difficult to be met with in the world is one who knows this and one who believes 
this highest (doctrine).” Therefore I do not venture to reveal it.

L After this was spoken Bodhisattva Vimukticandra said to Bodhisattva Vajragarbha.

”Indeed, o son of the Conqueror, well-purified is this assembly of Bodhisattvas who have 1) well-purified resolute intent
ions, 2) well-purified thought, 3) well-performed the practices, 4) well-served thousand billions of Buddhas, 5) well-co
llected the necessary preparations, 6) been endowed with immense merit and knowledge, 7) been separated from doubt and s
uspense, 8) been free from blemish, 9) well-settled the resolute intention and confidential faith and, 10) never depende
d upon other (heterodox teachings) in these Buddha's doctrines. Well! o son of the Conqueror, speak, because these Bodhi
sattvas stay before your eyes in this place.”

M Vajragarbha said “Even though, o son of the Conqueror, this assembly of Bodhisattvas has 1) well-purified resolute inte
ntions,

............ 10) never depended upon other (teachings) in these Buddha's doctrines,

and yet others would hear such unthinkable matters and would produce doubt and suspense. This would be useless, harmful a
nd painful to them for a long time. This is my benevolent mind with which I long for silence.

N Then indeed Bodhisattva Vimukticandra again requested Bodhisattva Vajragarbha (to explain) this meaning.“Bravo! o son o
f the Conqueror, speak it. Only by the might of Tathāgata such unthinkable matters would be wellguarded and believed.By 
what reason? Because, o son of the Conqueror, when the elucidation of these stages is spoken the ultimate essence of thi
ngs is acquired, that is what all the Buddhas intend deliberately.And all the Bodhisattva get into the eagerness to guar
d this stage of knowledge.By what reason? Because this is the first course of conduct this is the arrival at Buddha's do
ctrines.For instance, o son of the Conqueror, all the graphemes (grammata), words, numbers and elucidations are preceded
by letter matrices and end with letter matrices, and there is no grapheme, word (syllable), number or elucidation which
is without the elucidation of letter matrices.Just so, o son of the Conqueror, all the Buddha’s doctrines are preceded 
by the stages as they perfectly develop the course of conduct, and end with a stage as it attains the self-existent know
ledge.

Therefore speak, o son of the Conqueror! Tathāgatas, Arhants and Perfectly-Enlightened-Ones will sustain with protection.

Then indeed at that time all these Bodhisattvas requested Bodhisattva Vajragarbha (to explain) this meaning with recitati
on of verses, singing in one sound.

1) O one with best, excellent, pure intelligence! with welltelling and endlessly exerting intellect! Speak best sweet wor
ds possessed of the highest truth!

2) O one with firm mindfulness and pure intelligence! Proclaim the pure intention acquired by the power of the ten facult
ies, the ten investigations by analytical knowledge and the ten highest stages.

3) With good minds fixed by calm restraint, without impurity by arrogant and conceited views, free from doubt, this assem
bly prays for your speech.

4) Like a thirsty one longs for cool water, a hungry one for food a sick one for good remedy, and a multitude of bees for
honey, the assembly waits for your word.

5) Therefore, o one with pure intelligence, declare the excellent stages which are free from passion, possessed of the te
n faculties, without attachment, and proclaim the whole state of existence of the Sugata.

P Then indeed at that time a beam named The Splendor of The Power of Bodhisattva issued out from the hair-circle of vener
able Sakyamuni.It is followed by numberless beams and shines to the extent of all the world-regions in all ten direction
s. It quiets all the evil states and pains. It darkens all the abodes of Evil Ones. It illuminates immense assemblies of
Buddha. It shows the unthinkable majesty of the disposition of Buddha's sphere. It illuminates the Bodhisattvas sustain
ed by the sustaining power of doctrinal elucidation in all the assemblies of Tathāgatas to the extent of all the world-r
egions in all ten directions. It shows unthinkable miracles of Buddha. It makes a great house on the top of a dense clou
d-net of beams above in the atmosphere. And it stands.Also the beams named The Splendor of The Power of Bodhisattva issu
ed out from the hair-circle of venerable Buddhas.Having issued out they are followed by numberless beams and shine to th
e extent of all the world-regions in all ten directions. They quiet all the evil states and pains. They darken all the a
bodes of Evil Ones. They illuminate immense assemblies of Buddha. They show the unthinkable majesty of the disposition o
f Buddha's sphere: They illuminate the Bodhisattvas sustained by the sustaining power of doctrinal elucidation in all th
e assemblies of Tathāgatas to the extent of all the world-regions in all ten directions. They show unthinkable miracle o
f Buddha. They illuminate this assembly of the venerable Sakyamuni and the body of Bodhisattva Vajragarbha. They make a 
great house on the top of a dense cloud-net of beams above in the atmosphere. And they stand.Thus indeed by these beams 
issued out from the hair-circle of venerable Śākyamuni these world-regions and these Buddha’s assemblies and the bodies 
and seats are clearly illuminated and shown. And by beams issued out from the hair-circles of these venerable Buddhas in
immeasurable world-regions these triple thousand great thousand world-regions and this assembly of the venerable Śākyam
uni and the body and seat of Bodhisattva Vajragarbha are clearly illuminated and shown.

Then indeed from this great house on the top of a dense cloud-net of beams such voice issued out by Buddha's might.

1) By the doctrines of one born in Śaka-family, identical with the unequalled (one), identical with empty space, eminent 
because of the ten faculties, with endless foremost merits, best among divine and human beings ......... the sustaining 
has been made.

2) Disclose by the majestic power the store of Sugatas the kings of doctrine, the best lofty conduct and the stage of kno
wledge with divisions.

3) Those to whose range of hearing the excellent method of doctrine has gone, are sustained by Sugatas and supported by B
odhisattvas.

4) Having fulfilled the stainless ten stages one by one and having attained the ten faculties, they will fix the conquero
r-ship.

5) (Though) sunk down in the water of the ocean or thrown into the worldconflagration they are no doubt able to hear this
method of doctrine.

6) But those who are attached to perplexity and are approached by doubts, do not get to hear this in any way.

7) Speak the excellent way of the knowledge of the stages, the entrance, the staying, the passage from one stage to anoth
er, the course of conduct and the sphere (of the stages).

Q Then indeed Bodhisattva Vajragarbha, having beheld the ten directions, at that time spoke these verses in order to awak
en faith in this assembly in especially high degree.

1) The subtle way of the great sages is incomprehensible, without ·constructive thought, free from constructive thought (
akalpa-kalpapagata), very difficult to touch, unstained, known (only) by the discretion of learned men, tranquil by natu
re and without destruction and origination.

2) Void by nature, tranquil, non-dual, indestructible, freed from the states of existence, entered into nirvāṇa by obtain
ing equality, without extremity and middle, not to be uttered hy word, freed from the three (kinds of) time, identical w
ith the sky.

3) Calm, tranquillized, known (only) by Sugata, very difficult to be described by all the ways of utterance. The stage an
d the course of conduct are like this, very difficult to speak, how much less to hear.

4) It is free from the thinking and the way of mind, known (only) by the king of muni who produces knowledge, not manifes
ted (prabhavita) by aggregates, physical elements and senses, not unrlerstandable by mind, nor considered by thought.

5) As the foot-step of a bird in the sky cannot be uttered nor seen (even) by intelligent ones, so all the stages of the 
son of the Conqueror cannot be uttered, how much less be heard.

6) But from now I will mention successively only the introductory part through (my) benevolence, compassion and vow. The 
stages are not within the range of mind. Accomplish the stages with knowledge according to (your) intention (mental disp
osition).

7) Such range is difficult to see. He is indeed not able to proclaim the stages who relies on his own intention. But I wi
ll announce them by the compassionate might of the Conqueror. Listen, all showing complete accord and respect.

8) Indeed that entrance into knowledge is such that it cannot be declared even in world-ages. Listen! I will speak succin
ctly this whole truth of the meaning of doctrine as it stands.

9) Respectful and well prepared venerable ones! Bravo! I will speak (it) by the blessing of the Conqueror. I will utter t
he sound of the excellent doctrine, accompanied by illustrations, profitable and with weJl balanced syllables.

10) It is very difficult to say it with words. (Therefore) the immeasurable Blessing of Sugata has entered into me and ha
s taken the shape of a ray, and by his blessing I have the ability (to preach).

